;;; FILE-CREATED: <Timestamp: #{2009-09-05T16:09:33-04:00Z}#{09366} - by MON>
;;; (URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-web-howto.html')
;;; (URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-biblio.html')
;;; ==============================

HOW TO MAKE A FACETED CLASSIFICATION AND PUT IT ON THE WEB

Denton, William. "How to Make a Faceted Classification and Put It On the Web"
Nov. 2003. (URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-web-howto.html').

This follows Putting Facets on the Web: An Annotated Bibliography, and is the
second paper I wrote for Prof. Clare Beghtol of the Faculty of Information
Studies at the University of Toronto, who led me in a reading course named
"Applying Faceted Classification in an Online World." (It's also available as a
PDF (215K) which is formatted for printing.)  0. Introduction

Faceted classifications are increasingly common on the World Wide Web,
especially on commercial web sites (Adkisson 2003). This is not
surprising--facets are a natural way of organizing things. Many web designers
have probably rediscovered them independently by asking, "What other ways would
people want to view this data? What's another way to slice it?" A survey of the
literature on applying facets on the web (Denton 2003) shows that librarians
think it a good idea but are unsure how to do it, while the web people who are
already doing it are often unaware of S.R. Ranganathan, the Classification
Research Group, and the decades of history behind facets.

This paper will attempt to bridge the gap by giving procedures and advice on all
the steps involved in making a faceted classification and putting it on the
web. Web people will benefit by having a rigorous seven-step process to follow
for creating faceted classifications, and librarians will benefit by
understanding how to store such a classification on a computer and make it
available on the web. The paper is meant for both webmasters and information
architects who do not know a lot about library and information science, and
librarians who do not know a lot about building databases and web sites. The
classifications are meant for small or medium-sized sets of things, meant to go
on public or private web sites, when there is a need to organize items for which
no existing classification will do. It is certainly not the intent of this paper
to show how to build another universal classification, nor to describe how a
library that uses a faceted classification scheme can put their catalogue
online.

There are four main sections to this paper: when to make a faceted
classification, how to make one, how to store it on a computer, and how to make
it work on the web. I will concentrate on the middle two sections. The question
of when to use facets is not particularly difficult (leaving aside general
questions about the purpose and usefulness of classifications). Detailed advice
on the design and implementation of a good web site is beyond the scope of this
paper and requires a companion web site, with examples, to be best understood
(but see Nielsen (2000) for excellent advice). In the final section I offer some
guidelines on what to consider when putting facets on the web, but the
discussion is not lengthy. The two middle sections about how to make and store a
faceted classification receive a much fuller treatment.

What are facets? Consider a common example, wine. Each wine has a certain
colour. It comes from a certain place. It is made from a particular kind (or
blend) of grape. Its year of vintage is known. It has been guaranteed to be of a
certain quality by its country's wine authorities. It comes in a container of a
given volume. It has a price. A list could be made of all wines, but it would be
enormously long and unwieldy. On the web, it would mean scrolling through screen
after screen of endless subdivisions-- hard to use, and hard to search. With
facets, we can set up a handful of categories that will combine to fully
describe the wines: colour, origin, grape, year, appellation, volume,
price. Each category is populated with the right terms and organized in an
appropriate way. Then each bottle of wine is classified by picking and choosing
the right terms from each category. This is a faceted classification: a set of
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive categories, each made by isolating one
perspective on the items (a facet), that combine to completely describe all the
objects in question, and which users can use, by searching and browsing, to find
what they need.

Facets and the web go very well together. Barbara Kwasnick (1999, 39) said, "The
notion of facets rests on the belief that there is more than one way to view the
world, and that even those classifications that are viewed as stable are in fact
provisional and dynamic. The challenge is to build classifications that are
flexible and can accommodate new phenomena." And after they are built, the
challenge is to make them easy to use. With hypertext and the web, dynamic views
are only the click of a button away. Facets make a multi-dimensional
organizational scheme, and web browsers are an easy and familiar tool for
navigating many dimensions. All of the benefits of faceted classifications can
be realized on the web. Before we can discuss how, though, first we must see
when to use facets.  1. When to make a faceted classification

Kwasnick (1999) identifies four classificatory structures: hierarchies, trees,
paradigms, and facets. When one of the first three works, use it. If some other
organizing principle, such as a timeline or ordering by size, works, use it. The
design of the classification must follow its purpose, and different things can
be classified in different ways for different purposes, requiring different
structures. If the others are insufficient, look to facets.  1.1 When not to
make a faceted classification

Hierarchies and trees (imagine indented lists) are best when the entities in
question are viewed in such a way that they have one dimension of
classification. Hierarchies divide and redivide things into groups where each
new group is a sub-species of its parent group; everything that is true of a
group is also true of its sub-groups and so on down (Kwasnick 1999, 25). The
Linnean taxonomy of living things is the classic example of this. Trees, in
contrast, do not have the rules of inheritance (Kwasnick 1999, 30). For example,
North America contains Canada, the United States, and Mexico, and Canada
contains ten provinces and three territories, but Ontario is not a kind of
Canada, and Canada is not a kind of North America.

A paradigm is a two-dimensional classification (imagine a spreadsheet). Use
paradigms when there are two independent aspects to consider. Kwasnick (1999,
35-36) uses the example of terms describing kinship relations, which can be
organized into a grid, with sex (male/female) along one axis, and relation
(parent, sibling, parent's sibling) along the other axis. Comparing English and
Polish terms for the various relations shows that "cousin" covers four different
Polish terms, which do not ignore the sex of the cousin or which side of the
family they are on.  1.2 When to make a faceted classification

Facets will handle three or more dimensions of classification. When, for the
purposes of the classification, it is possible to organize the entities by three
or more mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive categories, then facets are
probably the appropriate classification. Facets can be used to organize the
entire world of knowledge, or the clothes in your cupboard, or anything in
between. Ranganathan's Colon Classification and the Bliss Bibliographic
Classification, which will be discussed in the next section, are universal
classifications. We will see examples of some smaller classifications as well.

Kwasnick (1999, 40-42) lists several things in favour of faceted
classifications: they do not require complete knowledge of the entities or their
relationships; they are hospitable (can accommodate new entities easily); they
are flexible; they are expressive; they can be ad hoc and free-form; and they
allow many different perspectives on and approaches to the things
classified. She lists three major problems: the difficulty of choosing the right
facets; the lack of the ability to express the relationships between them; and
the difficulty of visualizing it all. Choosing the right facets is crucial, and
requires good knowledge of the items being classified and the users, but that is
true of any sort of classification or organization. The lack of the expression
of relationships between the facets is a problem, one that this paper will not
discuss. We will assume that the items are known well by the users, who can
infer relationships from their own knowledge. As to the difficulty of
visualization, Kwasnick (1999, 42) notes, "Information technology has promise
for new ways of enabling multidimensional visualization and for developing
computer-assisted ways of discovering patterns and anomalies that can possibly
lead to new knowledge." We will see that the web fulfills that promise.  1.3
Dish detergent example

A running example will help illustrate the processes and principles I will
show. I decided to use for the domain (as we will call the set of things to be
classified) a small set of commercial products: dishwashing detergents. It
serves our purpose for a number of reasons: it is a familiar; it is fairly small
(though larger than one might ; think without having examined supermarket
shelves); ; the language used is somewhat restricted already; and, as we will
see later, it will serve as a good example of how to expand a small
classification into a larger one.

I visited the largest supermarket in my neighbourhood and wrote down the names
of all the dish detergents on their shelves. I have slightly rearranged their
order, but they were shelved almost like this --note the classifications the
store made when presenting the products to the shopper:

    Dishwasher liquids: Cascade Pure Rinse Formula; Electrasol lemon gel; No
    Name lemon gel; Palmolive spring blossom gel

    Dishwasher powders: Cascade Complete; Cascade, fresh scent; Electrasol
    Double Action, fresh scent; No Name Premium Formula; No Name Premium
    Formula, lemon-scented; Sunlight Lemon Fresh

    Gelpacs: Electrasol Gelpacs, orange blossom

    Tablets: Electrasol tabs; No Name Premium Formula tablets

    Washing-by-Hand Liquids: Ivory Classic; No Name Liquid Dish Detergent,
    lemon-scented; Palmolive Aroma Therapy, Lavender and Ylang Ylang; Palmolive
    Aroma Therapy, Mandarin and Green Tea Essence; Palmolive Original; Palmolive
    Spring Sensations, Fresh Green Apple; Palmolive Spring Sensations, Ocean
    Breeze; Palmolive Spring Sensations, Orchard Fresh; Palmolive,
    antibacterial; President's Choice Antibacterial Hand Soap & Dishwashing
    Liquid; President's Choice Invigorating Aroma Therapy, Passion Flower;
    President's Choice Relaxing Aroma Therapy, Ruby Red Grapefruit; President's
    Choice Tough on Grease; Sunlight, antibacterial; Sunlight, lemon fresh

For simplicity we will ignore the size and price of the products. Shoppers will
be our target audience: chemists and engineers working with soaps and household
cleaning products would have different needs requiring a different
classification. In the next section, we will take these items and build a
classification the supermarket can use to help shoppers find and buy the
detergent they want.

2. HOW TO CREATE A FACETED CLASSIFICATION

This section will describe a seven-step procedure for building a faceted
classification, based on the work of B.C. Vickery (1960) and Louise Spiteri
(1998). We will begin, however, by looking at some existing faceted
classifications to see how they are designed and what ideas they offer for
making new classifications.

2.1. SAMPLE FACETED CLASSIFICATIONS

First, let us look at two of the three best-known faceted universal
classification systems: the Colon Classification and the second edition of the
Bliss Bibliographic Classification (BC2). S.R. Ranganathan's Colon
Classification has five facets, now classic (see Ranganathan (1962), among his
many books, for an introduction to the facets and how to use them):

    * Personality (the something in question, e.g. a person or event in a
      classification of history, or an animal in a classification of zoology)
    * Matter (what something is made of)
    * Energy (how something changes, is processed, evolves)
    * Space (where something is)
    * Time (when it happens) 

These five, known as PMEST, may be enough for you. If you need more, look to BC2
for ideas (Broughton 2001, 79):

    * thing/entity
    * kind
    * part
    * property
    * material
    * process
    * operation
    * patient
    * product
    * by-product
    * agent
    * space
    * time 

Vanda Broughton, one of the editors of BC2, said, "These fundamental thirteen
categories have been found to be sufficient for the analysis of vocabulary in
almost all areas on knowledge. It is however quite likely that other general
categories exist; it is certainly the case that there are some domain specific
categories, such as those of form and genre in the field of literature" (2001,
79-80). BC2 makes an excellent starting point for thinking of how to make a
faceted classification. Its facets can be renamed and adapted to suit your
particular circumstances.

Vickery, a member of the Classification Research Group, had other general
suggestions:

    As well as these [general categories], in any scientific classification
    there may occur a number of terms applicable at several points in the
    combination formula. For example, any property or process may itself have a
    general property: rate, variation, and so on. There are general operations
    on properties (e.g. measurement) and on processes (e.g. initiation,
    control). There are also a number of operations concerned with apparatus
    (equipment, instruments) such as design and maintenance. Lastly there are a
    number of common logical or mental operations: comparison, explanation and
    so on. [Vickery then quotes other sets of fundamental categories, such as
    Shera and Egan's] agent, act, tools, object of action, time, space, and
    product. Barbara Kyle has written of natural phenomena, artefacts,
    activities, and 'purposes, aims, ideas, and abstracts.' De Grolier suggests
    the 'constant categories' of time, space, and action, and the 'variables',
    substance, organ, analytic, synthetic, property, form, and
    organization. (1960, 23-24)

The smaller the domain, the more specific and detailed the facets can get. There
is little or no need to deal with the complications inherent in organizing the
world of knowledge, and the system can be as precise as necessary to do what is
needed. Here follow some examples of smaller classifications, beginning with the
Art & Architecture Thesaurus (Petersen 1994, 26), which is not actually a
classification scheme, but is indeed faceted. Note how some of the
classifications are based on Ranganathan's Personality, Matter, Energy, Space,
and Time.

    * Associated Concepts (e.g., philosophy)
    * Physical Attributes (density)
    * Styles and Periods (Simulationist) (similar to Space and Time)
    * Agents (People/Organizations) (lighthouse keepers)
    * Activities (thinking) (similar to Energy)
    * Materials (plywood) (similar to Matter)
    * Objects (bunk beds) (similar to Personality) 

Epicurious (n.d.) is a web site about cooking, and organizes its recipes this
way:

    * Cuisine, i.e. ethnic origin (e.g., Indian) (similar to Space)
    * Special considerations (low-fat)
    * Meal/Course (soups)
    * Main Ingredients (potatoes) (similar to Matter)
    * Preparation (grill) (similar to Energy)
    * Season/Occasion (Valentine's Day) (similar to Time) 

Vickery (1975, 189-192) describes a classification scheme for containers:

    * Products (e.g., jam)
    * Parts (valves)
    * Materials (cork)
    * Operations (tooling)
    * Miscellaneous Common Sub-divisions (research, information, safety) 

There will be times when four or five facets are not enough. Vickery's soil
classification (1960, 20-21) needed eighteen:

    * Soil, according to constitution (e.g., peat soil)
    * Soil, according to origin (granitic soil)
    * Soil, according to physiography (desert soil)
    * Soil, according to texture (sandy clay)
    * Soil, according to climate (arctic soil)
    * Physical part of soil (gravel)
    * Chemical constituent of soil (nitrogen)
    * Structure of soil (profile)
    * Layer of soil (horizon)
    * Organism in soil (bacteria)
    * Parent material of soil (muck)
    * Process in soil (mineralization)
    * Property of soil (cohesion)
    * Measure of property (sticky point)
    * Operation on soil (amendment)
    * Equipment for operations (plough)
    * Substances used in amendment (lime)
    * Operations on these substances (placement) 

The International Sematech Wafer Services group, part of an international
consortium of semiconductor manufacturers, uses very specific categories that
will make little sense to most people outside the field (International Sematech
2003). These seem to be a mix of special Matter, Space, and Energy facets, but
there are no definitions given so it is hard to guess. With a small or expert
set of users, there is great freedom to be precise and terse:

    * Wafer Size (e.g., 200 mm)
    * Application (etch)
    * Feature Type (via/contact)
    * Feature Size (0.22 m)
    * Dielectrics (oxide)
    * Fills (tungsten)
    * Electrical Test (BTS) 

Lillian Vernon Online (n.d.) has a gift finder on its web site that lets the
user narrow down the range of possible purchases by selecting from four
facets. Depending on the search restrictions, any of a range of products for
travel, the bathroom, bedroom, kitchen, garden, or office will be listed.

    * Gift recipient (e.g., her)
    * Their interest (entertaining)
    * Occasion (birthday)
    * Price range ($25-$50) 

The site has two more options: one lets the user narrow the results to gifts
that can be personalized; the other controls the ordering of the results: by
product name or by increasing or decreasing cost. Any commercial classification
will need a cost or price facet.

2.2. SPITERI'S SIMPLIFIED MODEL FOR FACET ANALYSIS

Louise Spiteri (1998) analyzed the complicated sets of rules that Ranganathan
and the Classification Research Group laid down for how to make faceted
classification systems, and drew up her own simpler set. She did so primarily so
as a teaching tool for library and information science students, but notes that
"the model could be used by designers of faceted classification systems and IR
[information retrieval] thesauri, because these designers might also need to
consult a variety of sources to obtain the principles of facet analysis needed
for their work" (1998, 4). Spiteri's principles are straightforward and complete
and will form the backbone of the procedure set out below.

Spiteri follows Ranganathan and divides classification into three parts: "the
Idea Plane, which involves the process of analyzing a subject field into its
component part; the Verbal Plane, which involves the process of choosing
appropriate terminology to express those component part; and the Notational
Plane, which involves the process of expressing these component parts by means
of a notational device" (1998, 5). Going from Idea (which Spiteri divides into
two parts) to Verbal to Notational Planes take us from idea to word to number,
from the general concept of what the entity is about to expressing that concept
in a controlled vocabulary to turning those words into notation. The last step
of the Notational Plane will be less important than the others for us because of
how the web works.

Here are the principles of Spiteri's model for creating faceted classifications:

    Idea Plane: Principles for the Choice of Facets

    a) Differentiation: "when dividing an entity into its component parts, it is
    important to use characteristics of division (i.e., facets) that will
    distinguish clearly among these component parts" (Spiteri 1998, 5). For
    example, dividing humans by sex.

    b) Relevance: "when choosing facets by which to divide entities, it is
    important to make sure that the facets reflect the purpose, subject, and
    scope of the classification system" (1998, 6).

    c) Ascertainability: "it is important to choose facets that are definite and
    can be ascertained" (1998, 6).

    d) Permanence: facets should "represent permanent qualities of the item
    being divided" (1998, 18).

    e) Homogeneity: "facets must be homogeneous" (1998, 18).

    f) Mutual Exclusivity: facets must be "mutually exclusive," "each facet must
    represent only one characteristic of division" (1998, 18).

    g) Fundamental Categories: "there exist no categories that are fundamental
    to all subjects, and ... categories should be derived based upon the nature
    of the subject being classified" (1998, 18-19).

    Idea Plane: Principles for the Citation Order of Facets and Foci

    a) Relevant Succession: "the citation order of the facets [and foci] should
    be relevant to the nature, subject, and scope of the classification system"
    (1998, 21-22). Suggestions: chronological order, alphabetical order, spatial
    or geometric order, simple to complex, complex to simple, canonical,
    increasing quantity, or decreasing quantity.

    b) Consistent Succession: "once a citation order of facets has been
    established for a classification system, it should not be modified unless
    there is a change in the purpose, subject, or scope of the system" (1998,
    7-8). We'll ignore this if we allow the facets to be rearranged.

    Verbal Plane

    a) Context: "the meaning of an individual term is given its context based
    upon its position in the classification system" (1998, 11). E.g., London,
    Ontario, and London, England, can be identified as "London" alone, and which
    one is meant can be seen by whether that part of the classification is for
    cities in Ontario or England.

    b) Currency: "the terminology used in a classification system should reflect
    current usage in the subject field" (1998, 11). This means the system will
    require regular attention and revision.

    Notational Plane

    a) Synonym: "each subject can be represented by only one unique class
    number" (1998, 12).

    b) Homonym: "each class number can represent only one unique subject" (1998,
    12).

    c) Hospitality: "notation should allow for the addition of new subjects,
    facets, and foci, at any point in the classification system" (1998, 20).

    d) Filing Order: "a notational system should reflect the filing order of
    subjects. This type of notation would reflect the citation order underlying
    the classification system" (1998, 20).

2.3. MAKING THE FACETED CLASSIFICATION

Vickery had four steps for making a faceted classification scheme: first, "[t]he
essence of facet analysis is the sorting of terms in a given field of knowledge
into homogeneous, mutually exclusive facets, each derived from the parent
universe by a single characteristic of division" (1960, 12). Following that are
three steps: "(i) to assign an order in which the facets will be used in
constructing compound subject headings, (ii) to fit the schedules with a
notation which permits the fully flexible combination of terms that is needed
and which throws subjects into a preferred filing order, and (iii) to use the
faceted scheme in such a way that both specific reference and the required
degree of generic survey are possible" (1960, 13). My procedure for making the
faceted classification system rearranges Vickery's steps, and adds to the start
and finish to make it complete from beginning to end.

1. Domain collection. Collect a representative sample of the entities. In a
large domain, get enough to cover all foreseen possibilities. In a small domain,
use the entire domain.

2. Entity listing. List the entities, breaking down the descriptions into parts
and rearranging words. Separate sentences and phrases into their basic concepts
and isolate these concepts.

3. Facet creation. Examine the resulting terms and see what general, high-level
categories appear across all the entities. Study them and narrow them down into
a set of mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive facets, into which all the
terms from the previous step will fit. This is the Idea Plane, so use as
guidelines the Principles for the Choice of Facets. Use the Colon
Classification's and BC2's facets as starting points, and draw from other
classifications for inspiration. As Foskett (2003, 1064) put it:

    In applying facet analysis to a subject, the first step is to examine a
    representative sample of the literature and enumerate the subject of each
    article, book, or abstract. It soon becomes clear that the terms encountered
    may be grouped together in sets according to their relation to the subject
    and to each other, that they represent, in fact, the various aspects of the
    subject, each of which can be studied apart from the others, at least
    conceptually, even though in practice it may be impossible to separate them
    into groups of static entities apart from the phenomena in which they are
    observed.

Broughton (2001, 79) says of performing this step with BC2's categories:

    It can be seen that the categorical analysis is on a functional basis in
    which there are two different types of functionality; linguistic function
    and operational function. In essence, the categories represent a 'production
    process', and are particularly suitable for the analysis and organization of
    terms in technology (where originally they were developed). In analysing a
    given field one can ask, what is being done (or produced), what are its
    parts and properties, how this is achieved, by what means and by whom, where
    and when.

Remember the purpose of the classification and the users. Who will use it? Why?
Will they search it, browse it, or both? How well do they know the subject?
Always remember it is meant for them to use.

4. Facet arrangement. First, do a test ordering of all of the terms (now to be
known as "foci", or individually, "a focus") under the facets. Use the
Principles for the Citation Order of Facets and Foci as guidelines. You may have
a few marginal concepts that do not have a good home, and we will discuss that
problem later. When the foci are set out, do a test classification and make sure
that all the original entities can be described by picking foci from the
facets. If something was missed, go back and reanalyze or rearrange the terms.

Second, after the rough draft of the classification has been shown to work, do
the final facet arrangement, using the Principles for the Citation Order of
Facets and Foci. At this point you are working on both the Idea Plane and Verbal
Plane, so mind the relevant rules. Kwasnick (1999, 39-40) says of this step that
"[e]ach facet can be developed/expanded using its own logic and warrant and its
own classificatory structure. For example, [in the Art and Architecture
Thesaurus] the Period facet can be developed as a timeline; the Materials facet
can be a hierarchy; the Place facet a part/whole tree, and so on." You are free
to use whatever is best.

Now you must decide on a controlled vocabulary, if you have not already
naturally been using one. Foci are official words and phrases that will always
used for the concepts or things they represent. Other terms must be translated
into existing foci. For example, if you are classifying tinned vegetables, now
is the time when you choose between "chick peas" and "garbanzo beans." Authority
and vocabulary control like this is a complex field of its own and is beyond the
scope of this paper, but however you handle it, users and other classifiers must
be led from their own words to your chosen terminology. Without that, the system
will work for no-one but you.

5. Citation order. This is the Notational Plane. Kwasnick (1999, 40), says,
"[i]n organizing the classified objects, choose a primary facet that will
determine the main attribute and a citation order for the other facets. This
step is not required and applies only in those situations where a physical
(rather than a purely intellectual) organization is desired." She means, for
example, library shelves or printed bibliographies. On the web, we can make the
order as changeable as necessary if we wish. However, decide on a standard
citation order that will be the default way things are ordered on the web
site. It should be sensible, understandable, and useful to all
users. Experienced or curious users can rearrange the order if they wish and are
allowed to do so, but most people will use the basic view provided.

6. Classification. The classification system is now finished. Use it to classify
everything in the domain. Analyze the entities using the facets, and apply the
proper foci to describe each entity.

7. Revision, testing, and maintenance. If there were any problems in step 6, go
back as many steps as necessary to correct the problem. You may find that the
arrangement of foci in a facet needs changing, or that some foci are missing, or
perhaps even that your choice of facets is inaccuruate or incorrect. Go back
through the steps until you are able to classify everything to your complete
satisfaction. Test it on users (how to do so is unfortunately outside the scope
of this work) and make any more necessary changes. Finally, prepare to do
regular maintenance on the classification: update terminology as it changes;
verify that any new entities can be clearly and accurately classified; and make
sure that the facets and foci are complete enough to handle the domain as it
changes over time. You may need to add or rearrange foci, add a new facet, or
someday even make a whole new classification.

2.4. CLASSIFYING DISH DETERGENTS

Now we will apply the above seven rules to the domain of dish detergents, as
listed in §1.3. Step 1, Domain Collection, is done. Step 2, Entity Listing, is
done too: the product names are already broken down into constituent concepts
such as brand name, product name, scent, etc. This makes step 3, Facet Creation,
easier.

In Facet Creation we want to begin by seeing what general, high-level categories
appear across all the entities. Some stand out: Brand Name (Ivory, Palmolive,
Cascade); Form (dishwasher liquid, dishwasher power, handwashing liquids); Scent
(lemon, ocean breeze). The classification is meant for shoppers, so Brand Name
is the right name for that facet, but if the classification was meant for
stores, we might want to list Manufacturer or Distributor. Is that Form category
workable? On closer examination, we can see it violates the Principle of
Homogeneity. There are actually two things there: the physical form of the
dishwashing soap (liquid, gel, powder), and how the cleaning is done (by machine
or by hand). Let us call the first category Form, and the second (from BC2)
Agent. Ultimately, of course, a person is behind the cleaning, but the Agent
will be how they perform the cleaning--by machine or by themselves.

Brand Name, Form, Agent, and Scent take care of almost all the words and phrases
in the entity listing, but we are left with antibacterial Sunlight and the aroma
therapy products. The antibacterial property does not fit in with any of the
categories we have already made, and is quite different from them, so it will
need one of its own. We will not use a yes/no Antibacterial category, because
facets should be more than on/off switches. The property is related to, perhaps,
a special coffee-stain-fighting property of a detergent, or something that makes
white dishes whiter. Special Cleaning Property? The entire classification is
about cleaning. Special Property? That is a bit awkward, but will do. For the
aroma therapy detergents, we can see that this property is different from any
other because it affects (or at least purports to) the user of the detergents,
not the dishes. This is similar to the inclusion of skin lotion to prevent
chapping. It does not fit any of the general BC2 categories, but Effect on User
would handle it--but only if the user is a person. What if the detergent helps
the longevity of a dishwashing machine? That's basically the same idea, so
Effect on Agent is a better term.

Do these facets obey Spiteri's principles? The Principle of Differentiation
holds: the facets will make clear distinctions about the different aspects of
the entities. The Principle of Relevance holds: these are all important things
to know about when buying a dish detergent. The Principle of Ascertainability
holds: we can determine everything we need just by reading the label. The
Principle of Permanence holds: the detergents will not change from liquid to
powder by themselves, nor will an orchard fresh scent turn into the heady odour
of ylang ylang. The Principle of Homogeneity holds, as does the Principle of
Mutual Exclusivity. Finally, the Principle of Fundamental Categories holds: we
have derived the facets (all the ones possible, in fact) from the nature and
purpose of the detergents. Spiteri's principles are all fulfilled.

Nevertheless, the facets can be challenged. It can be argued, for example, that
Scent is really an effect on the ultimate agent, the human doing the dishes or
running the machine. Philosophers would say that while the Form of the detergent
is a primary quality, inseparable from the object, Scent is a secondary quality,
existing in the person smelling it. As to the particular foci in Scent, what
exactly are "ocean breeze" and "orchard fresh"? How do ruby red grapefruits
smell different from other grapefruits? But those are the terms used, so we will
stick with them, ridiculous though they may be. As well, perhaps the aroma
therapy detergents should be bundled in with Scent in a more encompassing facet,
since they are all about an effect on the human using the product. Or perhaps
not. Our facets do seem appropriate for the needs of the classification, so we
will leave them as they are.

Going into Step 4, Facet Arrangement, we have Brand Name, Form, Agent, Effect on
Agent, Scent, and Special Property. Now we must arrange the foci under those
categories.

    Brand Name: Cascade, Electrasol, Ivory, No Name, Palmolive, President's
    Choice, Sunlight

    Form: gel, gelpac, liquid, powder, tablet

    Agent: dishwasher, person

    Effect on Agent: aroma therapy (with subdivisions or sub-foci: invigorating,
    relaxing)

    Scent: green apple, lavender and ylang ylang, lemon, mandarin and green tea,
    ocean breeze, orange blossom, orchard fresh, passion flower, ruby red
    grapefruit

    Special Property: antibacterial 

A check will show that all the detergents can be classified with these facets
and foci. Arranging the foci in alphabetical order is simplest and most
appropriate, because there is no other sensible way to order them (national
origin of manufacturer, for example, or botanical classification of the source
of the scent) that would help our users, the shoppers. This follows the
Principle of Relevant Succession. The only unusual case here is the two kinds of
aroma therapy in Effect on Agent. I subdivided it into invigorating and
relaxing, making one focus with two sub-foci. In Scent, we will have to break
down the combination scents ("lavender and ylang ylang") into their components,
and then put them back together later when the entities are classified. It is
perfectly legal for two foci in the same facet to apply to one entity. If
several apply, they can be handled invididually, or perhaps grouped together
into a larger class if there are many. We could group "mandarin" and "orange
blossom" together somehow under "oranges," but for simplicity we will leave them
as they are.

Step 5 is Citation Order. Is the order given above (Brand Name, Form, Agent,
Effect on Agent, Scent, Special Property) satisfactory? We will reapply the
Principle of Relevant Succession, this time to the facets. When people look for
a dish detergent, the first thing on their mind is what Agent will do the
cleaning (a person, or a dishwasher) and what Form they need. After that, they
probably look by Brand Name, because they have a favourite brand and they stick
with it. After that, Scent is probably the next most interesting facet, and then
Effect on Agent and Special Property can follow. That will be the default
citation order, but when it goes on the web we can let the users reorder the
facets to their liking. (This will allow users to navigate and browse the
classification, the equivalent of scanning the shelves. Most shoppers will just
grab the same detergent they always buy, which is the equivalent of a known-
item search.)

Here is the final form of the classification scheme:

    Agent: dishwasher, person

    Form: gel, gelpac, liquid, powder, tablet

    Brand Name: Cascade, Electrasol, Ivory, No Name, Palmolive, President's
    Choice, Sunlight

    Scent: green apple, green tea, lavender, lemon, mandarin, ocean breeze,
    orange blossom, orchard fresh, passion flower, ruby red grapefruit, ylang
    ylang

    Effect on Agent: aroma therapy (subdivisions: invigorating, relaxing)

    Special Property: antibacterial 

Step 6 is Classification. For example, "President's Choice Antibacterial Hand
Soap & Dishwashing Liquid" would be:

  Agent: person
  Form:  liquid
  Brand Name: President's Choice
  Scent: (none)
  Effect on Agent: (none)
  Special Property: antibacterial

"Palmolive Aroma Therapy, Lavender and Ylang Ylang," would be

  Agent: person
  Form: liquid
  Brand Name: Palmolive
  Scent: lavender, ylang ylang
  Effect on Agent: aroma therapy
  Special Property: (none)

We will skip Step 7, Revision, Testing, and Maintenance, since we have no users
to consult.  

2.5 MARGINAL SUBJECTS AND EXPANDING THE CLASSIFICATION

Eventually every limited classification will have to handle something that does
not quite fit. Vickery (1960, 16-19) offers a few ways of handling these
situations. If some uncommon but related terms appear, one solution is to draw
on another classification that handles them fully. Vickery's example, from the
soil classification, involves chemical substances. Some are listed in the
classification, but others, as needed, can subdivide an "Other" focus by how
they are handled in another classification. "Other" is always a convenient place
to drop anything that does not have a proper home, but not an easy place to find
things.

If the mismatch is more than just a missing term or two, the entity can be
classified as something that is related to it, even if the relation is tenuous
and only exists in the way the users associate things. Vickery's example is of
an insurance classification where a book on the textile industry is put with
"Fire insurance: textile industry." Even though the book is not about insurance,
fire insurance is why the users would need to read about the textile industry.

In our dish detergent example, a potential marginal entity would be the products
that prevent streaks from appearing on glasses. Sometimes this is made part of
the detergent, in which case we would file it under Special Property. A
stand-alone anti-streak agent would fit into our classification if we ignore the
fact it is not a dish detergent and isolate the anti-streak aspect in a note or
comment. If two such products are handled the same way, there would be no way to
connect their shared property. That is when we would need to think about adding
a new facet.

If too many things are filed under "Other," or need to have important aspects of
their nature ignored so they can be made to fit, re-examine the classification
and see if it needs rearrangement or a new facet. Follow the rules above to see
what the facet should be. When added, it should mean that reclassifying all the
marginal entities gives them a new, accurate home and makes them easy to
find. In the dish detergent example, because of the facets we have chosen, it
would be easy to expand the classification to include other cleaning
products. The classification is for dish detergents, and each of those words
could be the beginning of a new facet: the dish is the object being cleaned, and
a detergent is a special sort of cleaning agent, chemically different from
bleach, ammonia, and even soap. (It might even be true that we are mixing soaps
and detergents in our domain, without acknowledging the difference, but it does
not matter for our purposes.) Adding, for example, Object and Cleanser Type
would mean we could classify hair shampoos, rug shampoos (which would need a new
Agent focus: rug cleaners), face soaps (possible new Effect on Agent: acne
reduction), Lysol, Vim, Ajax, Comet, Windex, and every other cleaning
product. Two facets, neither of which would have many foci,would mean we could
handle an enormous range and number of new entities. It would not be the end of
our problems, though: eventually there would be more marginal entities to
consider. Does mouthwash fit? Furniture polish? Hair conditioners? Products to
prevent static cling?

3. HOW TO STORE THE FACETED SYSTEM IN A COMPUTER

Two ways to store the faceted classification system on a computer are to use
XFML or a relational database. I will examine both with reference to the dish
detergents. For both, it is important to note that it will be a lot of work to
change the classification after it has been implemented. In the last section we
saw how powerful the addition of two facets would be. What took a paragraph to
explain would take much longer to actually make work. When designing a system to
store a classification on a computer, make it as easy as possible to handle
changes, but do everything to prevent that from ever being necessary. The
hospitality and flexibility that Kwasnick (1999, 40) listed as good features of
facets can be found in the web interface, but are not often matched by similar
qualities in software.

3.1 XFML

XFML is a markup language written in XML, and hence looks similar to HTML. It is
used to put faceted classifications into a standard machine- and human-readable
form that is easy to store, transmit, and manipulate. The specification (Van
Dick 2003) has the complete rules on how to use it, and we will just cover the
basics here.

There are two main elements in XFML: facet and topic. The facet element defines
the top-level facets. It has only one attribute, id, which will be the name used
internally to identify the facet. It can be an abbreviation or code number, but
here we will use the full name:

<facet id="agent">Agent</facet>
<facet id="form">Form</facet>
<facet id="brand_name">Brand Name</facet>
<facet id="scent">Scent</facet>
<facet id="effect_on_agent">Effect on Agent</facet>
<facet id="special_properties">Special Properties</facet>

That is all that is needed to define the facets. Defining the foci in each one
is done similarly, with the topic element (as XFML calls foci). Each topic
refers back to its parent facet. For example, the foci in the Brand Name facet
are defined this way:

<topic id="cascade"    facet_id="brand_name"><name>Cascade</name></topic>
<topic id="electrasol" facet_id="brand_name"><name>Electrasol</name></topic>
<topic id="ivory"      facet_id="brand_name"><name>Ivory</name></topic>
<topic id="no_name"    facet_id="brand_name"><name>No Name</name></topic>
<topic id="palmolive"  facet_id="brand_name"><name>Palmolive</name></topic>
<topic id="presidents_choice" facet_id="brand_name"><name>President's Choice</name></topic>

Again, the id attribute is an internal identifier. facet_id points to the facet
where the focus belongs, and inside the name tag is the actual name of the
focus.

The Effect on Agent facet demonstrates how to arrange foci and
sub-foci. Remember that the only focus in this facet is "aroma therapy," which
is divided into "invigorating" and "relaxing." The facet and its contents can be
described thusly, first by defining the facet, then the focus, and then
connecting the focus to the two sub-foci parentTopicid attribute:

<facet id="effect_on_agent">Effect on Agent</facet>
<topic id="aroma_therapy" facet_id="effect_on_agent"><name>aroma therapy</name></topic>
<topic id ="invigorating" facet_id="effect_on_agent" parentTopicid="aroma_therapy"><name>invigorating</name></topic>
<topicid="relaxing" facet_id="effect_on_agent" parentTopicid="aroma_therapy"><name>relaxing</name></topic>

When all the facets and topics (foci) have been defined, we can define the
entities. We would create a web page for each one (a description of the entity)
and then locate it in the classification. For example, President's Choice
Antibacterial Hand Soap & Dishwashing Liquid would look like this:

<page url="http://www.example.com/dishdetergents/pc/ahsdl.html">
    <title>President's Choice Antibacterial Hand Soap & Dishwashing Liquid</title>
    <occurrence topicid="person" />            <!-- Agent facet -->
    <occurrence topicid="liquid" />            <!-- Form facet -->
    <occurrence topicid="presidents_choice" /> <!-- Brand Name facet -->
    <occurrence topicid="antibacterial" />     <!-- Special Property facet -->
</page>

That matches up the entity with its facets. There is more to XFML than this, but
not a lot. As markup languages go, XFML is fairly simple.

Once the whole classification has been rendered in XFML, there remains the
problem of how to use it. There seems to be little open source software for XFML
available on the Internet, and there are no full-featured XFML libraries under
continuing maintenance for any major programming language. However, because XFML
is written in XML, any of the many XML libraries can be used to handle it. A
programmer can build custom XFML-handling code without much trouble. There is
one commercial product that handles XFML, Facetmap.

3.2 RELATIONAL DATABASES

The other option is to store the classification system in a relational
database. I will show first how to design the database, and then how to use it
for searching and navigation. The design is based on an entity-relationship
model (Chen 1976). ("Entities" in the title means something slightly different
from the way we have been using it, and to avoid confusion we will not use it in
that sense again.)

We begin by seeing how each facet relates to the entities: is it a one-to-many
or many-to-many relationship? In our example, most are one-to-many: for example,
one Brand Name at a time can be used by many detergents. One Form may be the
form of many detergents--there are several liquids and several powders--but each
detergent can have only one form. Such one-to-many relationships result in
simple database table structures. For example, the Brand Name facet becomes the
BRAND_NAME_T table. Each focus has its own row and unique primary key:

PK 	BRAND_NAME
1 	Cascade
2 	Electrasol
3 	Ivory
4 	No Name
5 	Palmolive
6 	President's Choice

For the sake of the example, EFFECT_ON_AGENT_T will be much simplified. Effect
on Agent is a hierarchical facet and that should be shown in the database
design. As we have seen, this is easy to handle in XFML, but here we will just
treat it as a list so as not to get bogged down in details:

PK 	EFFECT_ON_AGENT
1 	aroma therapy
2 	aroma therapy--invigorating
3 	aroma therapy--relaxing

The other facets are all similar, except for Scent. It is different because a
detergent can have more than one scent at a time, for example "mandarin and
green tea." This requires a many-to-many relationship, which requires a special
table to join together detergents and scents. We will leave that to last. First,
as with the other facets, we list Scent in the SCENT_T table:

PK 	SCENT
1 	green apple
2 	green tea
3 	lavender
4 	lemon
5 	mandarin
6 	ocean breeze
7 	orange blossom
8 	orchard fresh
9 	passion flower
10 	ruby red grapefruit
11 	ylang ylang

Now we build the table that will pull almost everything together and describe
the detergents: ENTITY_T. It will have a field for the name of the detergents,
and other fields to handle all the one-to- many relationships. Here are how the
two sample classifications from §2.4 will look. For readability the usual row
and column view of a database will be shown with one line per column. The
numbers here are the primary keys of the relevant rows from the other tables,
e.g., row 6 in BRAND_NAME_T is President's Choice. If the table was not given in
full above, row numbers are inferred from the facet listings in §2.4.

  PK: 1
  NAME: President's Choice Antibacterial Hand Soap & Dishwashing Liquid
  AGENT: 2
  FORM: 3
  BRAND_NAME: 6
  EFFECT_ON_AGENT: (null)
  SPECIAL_PROPERTY: 1

  PK: 2
  NAME: Palmolive Aroma Therapy, Lavender and Ylang Ylang
  AGENT: 3
  FORM: 3
  BRAND_NAME: 2
  EFFECT_ON_AGENT: 1
  SPECIAL_PROPERTY: (null)

Notice that there is no mention of Scent. Last, we build HAS_SCENT_T, where we
associate detergents and scents using the primary keys from the existing tables:

PK 	ENTITY 	SCENT
1 	2 	3
2 	2 	11

This table says that the entity with primary key 2 in ENTITY_T (i.e., Palmolive
Aroma Therapy, Lavender and Ylang Ylang) is associated with scents 3 and 11 in
SCENT_T (i.e., lavender and ylang ylang, respectively).

The database structure is now complete. We have AGENT_T, FORM_T, BRAND_NAME_T,
SCENT_T, EFFECT_ON_AGENT_T, and SPECIAL_PROPERTY_T, one table for each facet. We
have ENTITY_T to hold the names of the entities and handle the one-to-many
relations, and HAS_SCENT_T to match up the many-to-many relationships of
entities and Scent. In general, for classifications like this, the database will
require (# of facets + # of one-to-many relations + 1) tables.

Once the tables are populated and the entities are stored in the database, we
can use SQL to generate navigation and to answer user search queries. For
example, if the web site had a "Browse by Brand Name" option, the list of
manufacturers would be pulled from the database by running:

  select PK, BRAND_NAME from BRAND_NAME_T;

(The user would not see the primary key, but the system would need to remember
it.) The user could choose Palmolive, then choose a final "Browse by Form"
option to see what powders, gels, and liquids Palmolive makes, regardless of
where they are to be used, their scent, or any special properties. This query
will list the keys of the forms used by Palmolive entities:

  select FORM from ENTITY_T where BRAND_NAME = '5';

If the user wants to see all information about all detergents made by Palmolive,
this query will find it:

  select e.*, s.     SCENT from ENTITY_T e, SCENT_T s, HAS_SCENT h
  where e.FORM =      '5'
  and h.ENTITY =      e.PK
  and h.SCENT =       s.PK;

(The many-to-many relationship for Scent makes the SQL statements longer than
they would be otherwise.)

Searching is easy to handle. If the user is shown a menu listing each facet and
its foci, and given the ability to pick and choose what particular elements he
or she wants, then an SQL statement is easy to build. For example, if the user
asks to see all lemon-scented powders (where "powder" is fourth in the FORM_T):

  select e.*, s.     SCENT from ENTITY_T e, SCENT_T s, HAS_SCENT_T h
  where e.form =      '4'
  and h.scent =       '4'
  and h.entity =      e.pk
  and h.scent =       s.pk;

3.3 WHICH IS BETTER?

XFML offers all the benefits of XML, while relational databases offer
SQL. Whoever is in charge of designing the implementation of a web-based faceted
classification system will need to choose whichever is best given his or her
particular circumstances: which will run faster, the expertise of the
programmers, technical requirements and limitations in the organization, the
size of the classification, how the classification will relate to the entities
it organizes, and future plans. In XFML's favour is that its files are plain
text and can be created and edited by hand without any special tools, and we saw
how easy it is to handle hierarchical facet listings. However, while using a
database adds some complexity, SQL and relational databases are not only very
powerful but familiar to most programmers. There are many SQL libraries
available for all major programming languages.

4. HOW TO PUT THE CLASSIFICATION ON THE WEB

Facets and the web go well together. It is easy show the user a menu of facet
listings and let him or her pick and choose what is of interest. The user can
make quick choices, thinking, "I'd like to see something with that, and that,
and a bit of that, and I don't care about the rest," then click a button and see
the results. Such systems are becoming more common and users will be ever more
comfortable with them. Complete coverage of all the issues involved in putting
facets onto the web is beyond the scope of this paper, however, touching as it
does on information visualization, human-computer interaction, design and use of
OPACs, and hypertext and/or graphical display of information. I will discuss
some of the basic issues involved in putting facets on the web and suggest how
to handle them with simple HTML and Javascript. For deeper analysis, the reader
should begin with Rosenfeld and Morville (2002), who cover everything about
information architecture and the web, and Baeza-Yates and Ribeiro-Neto (1999),
who discuss all aspects of information retrieval including interface design. As
well, IFLA's (2003) guidelines for OPAC displays will be of great use even to
people outside the library world.

There are two basic ways to make a faceted classification usable on the web:
keyword searching or facet-based navigation.

4.1 KEYWORD SEARCHING

In keyword searches, the user types in one or more words to see if they match
anything. The system will search facets, foci, and entity descriptions. The
results display will depend on many things: the number and location of any
keyword matches, the size and nature of the classification, the nature of the
entities and their descriptions, the users, and the intent of the web
site. Whatever is done, it should help the user find the most relevant results
in the shortest time. If the search terms match entity descriptions, they should
be shown--but there is the problem of how to handle too many results. Matching
facets and foci should have precedence on the page: there will be fewer of them,
they are of more importance in the classification, and they can serve as
starting points for navigation. In the dish detergent classification, for
example, searching on "lemon" should return all the lemon-scented products, each
listed under its full classification. The user could look at details of the
products, use the listed classifications as starting points for further
browsing, or refine the search with more terms.

Efficient keyword searching like this requires a well-managed controlled
vocabulary, as mentioned in the Facet Arrangement step in §2.4. Such a system
would mean that a user searching for citrus-scented detergents would see the
lemon-, grapefruit-, and orange-scented products. "Citrus" does not appear in
any product names, but the classification creator could arrange that anyone
searching for that word would be led to the two known related words. Aside from
such a controlled vocabulary, if the entities are text (for example, articles or
books), then full-text searching is possible. A full treatment of these searches
is beyond the scope of this essay (but see Rosenfeld and Morville (2002) for a
good web- focused treatment of the topic), and the rest of the discussion will
focus on searches where the user's options are controlled. The key point is that
any search should show the user what matches and where it sits in the
classification, so that the user can either navigate directly to the entity they
want, or browse for related items.

4.2 FACET-BASED NAVIGATION: THREE QUESTIONS AND FOUR PRINCIPLES

There are three questions to ask when planning how to build the web
site. Finding and blending the appropriate answers will give you a good starting
point for building navigational tools for the site.

1. Do you want to focus on free navigation or on navigation by selection? The
first lets the user move from page to page through a list of hypertext links;
the second has the user navigate by choosing options in forms (single or
multiple select menus, radio buttons, or checkboxes) and clicking a submit
button. Form elements allow for more interaction. Single and multiple select
menus differ in their size on the page and because more than one option can be
selected simultaneously in the latter. Checkboxes and radio buttons show a list
of choices to the user, who must make a selection by activating a button beside
a term. Only one radio button can be active at a time, but with checkboxes more
than one can be chosen. When forcing foci selection in a menu, use single select
menus or radio buttons for one-to- many relationships, and multiple selects or
checkboxes for many-to-many relationships.

2. What are the facets like? How many are there? Which are the most important?
How long are the foci listings? Do they vary widely? Do the entities all use
only one focus from each facet, or are there some many-to-many relationships?
Are they trees, hierarchies, timelines, lists, or some other ordering? Simple
alphabetical or numeric lists, or timelines, can be displayed as they
are. Hierarchies and trees will need to be specially formatted for clarity,
perhaps into indented lists. Collapsible lists (as found in most graphical file
manager utilities) are understood well by users, but require Javascript.

3. How much control over the facet ordering (the citation order) will users
have? Will you restrict them to a particular ordering, or can they rearrange the
facets as they please? Facets can be reordered by giving each an ordinal
("second") or cardinal ("2") number and letting the user choose their own order,
or by letting the user drag and drop the form elements on the page (perhaps with
Javascript and dynamic HTML). Allowing users to rearrange facets will give them
a power over the classification impossible to realize with paper. Forcing a
defined order on the user will be easier for the webmaster, but it prevents the
user from using one of the most powerful benefits of facets.

There are four general principles to remember:

1. The user should not be able to form a query that is known to have no
results. Links and form elements can be changed on the fly so that as the user
selects a focus from one facets, the foci listings in other facets adjust
themselves so that the only ones shown are the ones leading to possible
matches. This will save the user's time. For example, in the dish detergents,
Electrasol makes no liquids for hand washing. If the user chooses to see all of
Electrasol's detergents, the Form and Agent facet listings should be limited. Of
course, the user must be able to see what has happened and know why the choices
are unavailable.

2. Users must always know where they are in the classification. Always show them
the facets and foci they have chosen, and make every point in the classification
a hypertext link. Every facet and focus is a pivot point around which the user
can rearrange the classification. Every hyperlink is a branch point leading from
one dimension of the classification into another. The users should be able to
travel through the facets and foci however they please, and whenever they
please, they should be able to adjust the path they took to get there, or the
path they intend to take to get out. This, combined with the power to rearrange
the ordering of the facets, is what makes it possible to realize the full
potential of faceted classifications on the web.

3. Users must always be able to refine their query or adjust their navigation to
see what is nearby in the classification. Imagine a series of dials, one for
each facet, all in a row, each like the tuning dial on a radio. When the user
has tuned in the classification they want, they should be able to twiddle a dial
back and forth to see what is nearby. Adjusting the Brand Name dial would run
through all the other brand names. Adjusting the Form dial would run through
powders, gel, and so on. This interface cannot be built with simple HTML, but
some sort of related browsing feature is needed. One of the purposes of a
classification is to show what is like a given thing, and with facets there are
many possible ways for things to be alike.

4. The URL is the notation for the classification. It should be compact but
comprehensible, and editable. When a knowledgeable user examines it, he or she
should be able to understand how it is built and how editing it could lead to
other entities.

These questions and principles cover all the issues involved in putting facets
on the web. With them, all of the features of a faceted classification can be
realized on the web. They can undoubtedly be improved with testing and research,
but they demonstrate that the web is a perfect home for facets.  4.3 Suggestions
for web page design

If your classification is small, in number and length of facets, it is probably
best to use controlled searching. Array all the facets across the page in the
preferred order (see http://www.sematech.org/waferservices/find.htm for an
example of this). Using checkboxes or single select menus (or multiple if
necessary), allow the user to choose from each facet or to specify a wildcard
indicating they want to see everything matching. Keep the form at the top of the
page when the results are displayed so the user can redefine the search. Let the
users reorder the facets if you can.

If you have many facets, or they are long, it may be better to have users
navigate the site facet by facet. Have users work their way into the
classification step by step and narrow down the range of entities until reaching
a point in the citation order where the detail is exact enough that they want to
see a list of everything matching (see http://www.cmsreview.com/Directory.html
for an example of something like this). For this, text links or single select
menus work best. Make the user choose a focus from the first facet, then show a
list of all the possible choices from the second facet in the citation order,
leaving out any foci that lead to dead ends. The user may go through as many
facets as desired, then see a listing of all entities that match so far. The
chosen facets can be listed horizontally along the top of the page, or
vertically along the left. Let the users reorder the facets if you can. The end
result of this will be the same as when the classification is small enough to be
shown all at once, except that here they are making their choices sequentially
instead of simultaneously.

These are merely two suggestions on possible ways to choose from the basic
principles. Each can be adjusted, and new combinations can be made. Good design
fundamentals (see Nielsen (2000)) must underly any web site, and the site must
be tested on users: if they cannot make sense of it, the classification is
useless. Adkisson (2003) examined 75 e-commerce web sites to see how they used
faceted classification. She found that 69% of them used facets. Of those, 77%
offered facet-based navigation, 6% offered facet-based searching, and 17%
offered both. Sixty-seven per cent of the sites with faceted navigation did not
make full use of it: they let the user choose one facet, to begin navigating the
site from a particular point of reference, but then never showed facet options
again. The user's first choice was the only one he or she was permitted to
make. Of the other sites, 28% let the user select other facets as he or she
navigates an increasingly restricted set of possibilities and results. Four per
cent let the user browse with a search-type interface, making many choices at
once with a search- like array of pop-up menus. These results show that
e-commerce sites make fairly limited use of facets. Further study on how facets
are used across the web, and what interfaces are the most usable, is
deserved. Indeed, more research on all aspects of how facets relate to
human-computer interaction and information visualization is warranted.
5. Conclusion

I have covered all aspects of using faceted classification systems on the web:
when to use one, how to make it, how to store it on a computer, and how the web
interface should work. I have given a seven- step model for the creation of a
faceted classification, and five questions to ask and four principles to follow
when building a facet-based web interface. Faceted systems are very powerful,
and their increasing popularity on the web is no surprise. They will only become
more common, so it is important to design and deploy them well. All the benefits
of a faceted classification can be fully realized on the web, giving users power
that they have not had with simpler web-based systems or with faceted systems on
paper.

There is much about all this still to be studied. Throughout the paper, we have
had to cast aside or ignore important issues from many fields of study to keep
the discussion manageable: the philosophy of classification and knowledge
organization; details about hierarchies, trees, and paradigms; how to test
classification systems with users; whether the model described here for the
creation of a faceted classification system is acceptable, and how to test that;
implementation details about using XFML and relational databases to store the
classification system, for example, how to handle hierarchies in a database;
most aspects of how to design a good web site, from the HTML that makes it work
to the principles of human-computer interaction and usability that make it good,
especially including what user interfaces are best for facets; and whether the
five questions and four principles about web interfaces are valid and how they
can be tested. Some of subjects are amply discussed elsewhere, but the
particulars of my model for classification creation need testing, and the use of
facets on the web needs investigation.

REFERENCES

Adkisson, Heidi P. 2003. Use of faceted classification. 
(URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/') (accessed 2 November 2003).

Baeza-Yates, Ricardo, and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. 1999. Modern Information
Retrieval. New York: ACM Press.

Broughton, Vanda. 2001. Faceted classification as a basis for knowledge
organization in a digital environment; the Bliss Bibliographic Classification as
a model for vocabulary management and the creation of multi-dimensional
knowledge structures. The New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 2001: 67-102.

Chen, Pin-Shan. 1976. The entity-relationship model--toward a unified view of
data. ACM Transactions on Database Systems 1 (1) (March 1976): 9-36.

Denton, William. 2003. Putting facets on the web: an annotated
bibliography. (URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-biblio.html').

Epicurious. n.d. Recipe search. 
(URL `http://eat.epicurious.com/recipes/enhanced_search/') 
(accessed 15 November 2003).

Foskett, Douglas J. 2003. Facet analysis. In Encyclopedia of Library and
Information Science, 2nd ed., ed. Miriam A. Drake (New York: Marcel Dekker),
1063-1067.

IFLA Task Force on Guidelines for OPAC Displays. 2003. Guidelines for online
public access catalogue (OPAC) displays [draft]. 
(URL `http://www.ifla.org/VII/s13/guide/opacguide03.pdf') 
(accessed 17 November 2003).

International Sematech. 2003. Wafer processing services: find a patterned
product. (URL `http://www.sematech.org/waferservices/find.htm') 
(accessed 2 November 2003).

Kwasnick, Barbara H. 1999. The role of classification in knowledge
representation and discovery. Library Trends 48 (1): 22-47.

Lillian Vernon Online. n.d. Gift finder. 
(URL `http://www.lillianvernon.com/cgi-bin/giftfinder.pl') 
(accessed 4 November 2003).

Nielsen, Jakob. 2000. Designing web usability: the practice of
simplicity. Indianapolis, IN: New Riders.

Petersen, Toni. 1994. Art & architecture thesaurus. Vol. 1, Part I:
Introduction, Part II: Hierarchical displays. New York: Oxford University Press.

Ranganathan, S.R. 1962. Elements of library classification. New York: Asia
Publishing House.

Rosenfeld, Louis, and Peter Morville. 2002. Information architecture for the
World Wide Web. 2nd ed. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly.

Spiteri, Louise. 1998. A simplified model for facet analysis: Ranganathan
101. Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science 23 (1/2) (April-July):
1-30.

Van Dijck, Peter. 2003. XFML Core - eXchangeable Faceted Metadata Language. 
(URL `http://www.xfml.org/spec/1.0.html') (accessed 15 October 2003).

Vickery, B.C. 1960. Faceted classification: a guide to construction and use of
special schemes. London: Aslib.

——— 1975. Classification and indexing in science. 3rd ed. London: Butterworths.
William Denton mailto:buff@pobox.com [ Last modified: Sun Jan 4 17:38:35 EST 2004 ]

;;; ==============================
;;; <Timestamp: #{2009-09-05T16:20:10-04:00Z}#{09366} - by MON>
;;; (URL `http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-biblio.html')
;;; ==============================

Putting Facets on the Web: An Annotated Bibliography
Submitted by wtd on 28 March 2009 - 1:30am

Denton, William. "Putting Facets on the Web: An Annotated Bibliography" Oct. 2003. http://www.miskatonic.org/library/facet-biblio.html.

I wrote this for Prof. Clare Beghtol of the Faculty of Information Studies at the University of Toronto, who led me in a reading course named "Applying Faceted Classification in an Online World." After this, I wrote How to Make a Faceted Classification and Put It On the Web.
Introduction

This is a classified, annotated bibliography about how to design faceted classification systems and make them usable on the World Wide Web. It is the first of three works I will be doing. The second, based on the material here and elsewhere, will discuss how to actually make the faceted system and put it online. The third will be a report of how I did just that, what worked, what didn't, and what I learned.

Almost every article or book listed here begins with an explanation of what a faceted classification system is, so I won't (but see Steckel in Background below if you don't already know). They all agree that faceted systems are very appropriate for the web. Even pre-web articles (such as Duncan's in Background, below) assert that hypertext and facets will go together well. Combined, it is possible to take a set of documents and classify them or apply subject headings to describe what they are about, then build a navigational structure so that any user, no matter how he or she approaches the material, no matter what his or her goals, can move and search in a way that makes sense to them, but still get to the same useful results as someone else following a different path to the same goal. There is no one way that everyone will always use when looking for information. The more flexible the organization of the information, the more accommodating it is. Facets are more flexible for hypertext browsing than any enumerative or hierarchical system.

Consider movie listings in newspapers. Most Canadian newspapers list movie showtimes in two large blocks, for the two major theatre chains. The listings are ordered by region (in large cities), then theatre, then movie, and finally by showtime. Anyone wondering where and when a particular movie is playing must scan the complete listings. Determining what movies are playing in the next half hour is very difficult. When movie listings went onto the web, most sites used a simple faceted organization, always with movie name and theatre, and perhaps with region or neighbourhood (thankfully, theatre chains were left out). They make it easy to pick a theatre and see what movies are playing there, or to pick a movie and see what theatres are showing it. To complete the system, the sites should allow users to browse by neighbourhood and showtime, and to order the results in any way they desired. Thus could people easily find answers to such questions as, "Where is the new James Bond movie playing?" "What's showing at the Roxy tonight?" "I'm going to be out in in Little Finland this afternoon with three hours to kill starting at 2 ... is anything interesting playing?" A hypertext, faceted classification system makes more useful information more easily available to the user.

Reading the books and articles below in chronological order will show a certain progression: suggestions that faceting and hypertext might work well, confidence that facets would work well if only someone would make such a system, and finally the beginning of serious work on actually designing, building, and testing faceted web sites. There is a solid basis of how to make faceted classifications (see Vickery in Recommended), but their application online is just starting. Work on XFML (see Van Dijck's work in Recommended) the Exchangeable Faceted Metadata Language, will make this easier. If it follows previous patterns, parts of the Internet community will embrace the idea and make open source software available for others to reuse. It will be particularly beneficial if professionals in both information studies and computer science can work together to build working systems, standards, and code. Each can benefit from the other's expertise in what can be a very complicated and technical area. One particularly nice thing about this area of research is that people interested in combining facets and the web often have web sites where they post their writings.

This bibliography is not meant to be exhaustive, but unfortunately it is not as complete as I wanted. Some books and articles are not be included, but they may be used in my future work. (These include two books and one article by B.C. Vickery: Faceted Classification Schemes (New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers, 1966), Classification and Indexing in Science, 3rd ed. (London: Butterworths, 1975), and "Knowledge Representation: A Brief Review" (Journal of Documentation 42 no. 3 (September 1986): 145-159; and A.C. Foskett's "The Future of Faceted Classification" in The Future of Classification, edited by Rita Marcella and Arthur Maltby (Aldershot, England: Gower, 2000): 69-80). Nevertheless, I hope this bibliography will be useful for those both new to or familiar with faceted hypertext systems. Some very basic resources are listed, as well as some very advanced ones. Some example web sites are mentioned, but there is no detailed technical discussion of any software. The user interface to any web site is extremely important, and this is briefly mentioned in two or three places (for example the discussion of lawforwa.org (see Example Web Sites)). The larger question of how to display information graphically and with hypertext is outside the scope of this bibliography.

There are five sections: Recommended, Background, Not Relevant, Example Web Sites, and Mailing Lists. Background material is either introductory, advanced, or of peripheral interest, and can be read after the Recommended resources if the reader wants to know more. The Not Relevant category contains articles that may appear in bibliographies but are not relevant for my purposes.
Recommended

Broughton, Vanda. "Faceted Classification as a Basis for Knowledge Organization in a Digital Environment; the Bliss Bibliographic Classification as a Model for Vocabulary Management and the Creation of Multi-Dimensional Knowledge Structures." The New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 7 (2001): 67-102.

Broughton is one of the key people working on the second edition of the Bliss Bibliographic Classification (BC2). Her article has a brief, informative history of facets, then discusses semantic vs. syntactic relationships, standard facets used by Ranganathan and the Classification Research Group, facet analysis and citation order, and how to build subject indexes out of faceted classifications, all with occasional reference to digital environments and hypertext, but never with any specifics. It concludes by saying of faceted classification that the "capacity which it has to create highly sophisticated structures for the accommodation of complex objects suggests that it is worth investigation as an organizational tool for digital materials, and that the results of such investigation would be knowledge structures of unparalleled utility and elegance." How to build them is left to the reader, but this article provides an excellent starting point. It includes an example that shows how general concepts can be applied to a small set of documents and subjects, and how terms can be adapted to suit the material and users.

Doyle, Bob. "The Classification & Evaluation of Content Management Systems." The Gilbane Report 11 no. 2 (March 2003): 2-13. http://www.gilbane.com/artpdf/GR11.2.pdf.

This is a report on how Doyle and others made a faceted classification scheme for content management systems and made it browsable on the web (see CMS Review in Example Web Sites, below). They discuss why they did it, how, their use of OPML and XFML, how they did research to find terms and categories, and they also include their taxonomy. It is interesting to see facets used in a business environment.

Fast, Karl, Fred Leise, Mike Steckel. "0. All About Facets and Controlled Vocabularies" Boxes and Arrows, 9 December 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/all_about_facets_controlled_vocabularies.php.

——— "1. What Is a Controlled Vocabulary?" Boxes and Arrows, 16 December 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/what_is_a_controlled_vocabulary.php.

——— "2. Creating a Controlled Vocabulary" Boxes and Arrows, 7 April 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/creating_a_controlled_vocabulary.php.

——— "3. Synonym Rings and Authority Files" Boxes and Arrows, 26 August 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/synonym_rings_and_authority_files.php.

——— "4. Controlled Vocabularies: A Glosso-Thesaurus" Boxes and Arrows, 27 October 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/controlled_vocabularies_a_glossothesaurus.php.

——— "Facets and Controlled Vocabularies: An Annotated Bibliography" Boxes and Arrows, n.d. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/Facets_CV/Bibliography.htm.

An online series of articles explaining controlled vocabularies and, in particular, faceted classification. It is not yet finished, but what they have covered is very well done, practical and informative, with useful advice and a full treatment. It is worth reading now, and when they actually get to performing facet analysis and making a faceted system, it will make a very useful reference.

Kwasnick, Barbara H. "The Role of Classification in Knowledge Representation and Discovery." Library Trends 48 no. 1 (Summer 1999): 22-47.

A fascinating, broad-ranging article about classification, knowledge, and how they relate. Hierarchies, trees, paradigms (a two-dimensional classification that can look something like a spreadsheet), and facets are covered, with descriptions of how they work and how they can be used for knowledge discovery and creation. Kwasnick outlines how to make a faceted classification: choose facets, develop facets, analyze entities using the facets, and make a citation order. Facets are useful for many reasons: they do not require complete knowledge of the entire body of material; they are hospitable, flexible, and expressive; they do not require a rigid background theory; they can mix theoretical structures and models; and they allow users to view things from many perspectives. Facets do have faults: it can be hard to pick the right ones; it is hard to show relations between them; and it is difficult to visualize them. The coverage of the other methods is equally thorough and there is much to consider for anyone putting a classification on the web.

Louie, Aaron J., Eric L. Maddox, and William Washington. "Using Faceted Classification to Provide Structure for Information Architecture." Paper presented at the ASIS&T 2003 Information Architecture Summit, Portland, OR, 21-23 March 2003. http://depts.washington.edu/pettt/presentations/conf_2003/IASummit.pdf.

This is a short, but very thorough and very interesting, report on how the writers built a faceted classification for some legal information and used it to structure a web site with navigation and searching. There is a good summary of why facets work well and how they fit into bibliographic control in general. The last section is about their implementation of a web site for the Washington State Bar Association's Council for Legal Public Education. Their classification uses three facets: Purpose (the general aim of the document, e.g. Resources for K-12 Teachers), Topic (the subject of the document), and Type (the legal format of the document). See Example Web Sites, below, for a discussion of the site and a problem with its design.

A very large PDF of the six-foot-wide illustrated poster from their poster session is available at http://depts.washington.edu/pettt/presentations/conf_2003/IASummit-Poster-Louie.pdf.

Priss, Uta, and Elin Jacob. "Utilizing Faceted Structures for Information Systems Design," in ASIS '99: Proceedings of the 62nd ASIS Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., October 31 - November 4, 1999: Knowledge: Creation, Organization, and Use, edited by Larry Woods, 203-212. (Medford, NJ: ASIS, [1999?]). http://www.upriss.org.uk/papers/asis99.pdf.

The writers show that a faceted navigation structure makes web sites easier to use. They begin by analyzing the web sites of three library and information science faculties, and seeing if the sites easily provide the answers to five specific questions, e.g., how the school ranks in national evaluations. (It is worth noting that the web site of the Faculty of Information Studies and the University of Toronto, where this bibliography is being written, would fail on four of the five questions.) Using examples from LIS web site content, they show how facets can be related and constructed, and use concept diagrams for illustration. They briefly discuss constraints necessary when joining facets: for example, enrolled students can be full- or part-time, but prospective and alumni students cannot. It should not be possible to construct terms such as "part-time alumni" (see Yannis Tzitzikas et al, below in Background). They conclude that a faceted approach is best for web site navigation, because it can clearly show where the user is in the site, what the related pages are, and how to get to them. There is a short discussion of user interfaces, and the diagrams in the paper will be of interest to anyone making a facet-based web site. This paper is clearly written, informative, and thought-provoking. Uta Priss's web site lists her other publications, many of which are related and some of which are online: http://www.upriss.org.uk/top/research.html.

Ranganathan, S.R. Elements of Library Classification. 3rd ed. New York: Asia Publishing House, 1962.

A medium-length book, based on lectures, aimed at classificationists, not cataloguers or classifiers. Ranganathan begins with his Five Laws and a definition of classification and its purposes. He gives a list of 108 subjects in "unhelpful alphabetical sequence" and shows how they can be grouped into subjects, and then how each each subject's terms can be organized in a helpful and useful way, thereby demonstrating and building up his basic canons, postulates, and principles of classification. All of that, roughly the first half of the book, will be of interest to anyone starting to make classification systems. It has all of what makes Ranganathan's work so delightful to read: his unending concern for the user, his deep thought, and his warmth, humour, and spirituality. The second half of the book, however, has what can make his work difficult: his unyielding belief that the Colon Classification is the only system worth using. The reader will not be very interested in repeatedly classifying books under various systems and then reversing the process to see how closely the call number matches the subject. However, the reader can take the ideas so clearly presented in the first half of the book and then veer off to build his or her own system, while remembering that if his classification laws are likened to Euclid's laws of geometry, there is no room for a Riemann or Lobachevksy in Ranganathan's strict world.

Spiteri, Louise. "A Simplified Model for Facet Analysis: Ranganathan 101." Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science 23 no. 1/2 (April-July 1998): 1-30. http://aifia.org/pg/a_simplified_model_for_facet_analysis.php.

Ranganathan's canons, principles, and postulates can easily confuse readers, especially because he revised and added to them in various editions of his many books. The Classification Research Group, who drew on Ranganathan's work as their basis for classification theory but developed it in their own way, has never clearly organized all their equivalent canons and principles. In this article Spiteri gathers the fundamental rules from both systems and compares and contrasts them. She makes her own clearer set of principles for constructing facets, stating the subject of a document, and designing notation. Spiteri's "simplified model" is clear and understandable, but certainly not simplistic. The model does not include methods for making a faceted system, but will serve as a very useful guide in how to turn initial work into a rigorous classification. Highly recommended.

Van Dijck, Peter. "Introduction to XFML." xml.com, 22 January 2003. http://www.xml.com/lpt/a/2003/01/22/xfml.html.

Van Dijck builds up an example of actual XFML by showing how to organize tourist information about what restaurants in what cities feature which kind of music: <facet id="city">City</facet> and <topic id="ny" facetid="city"><name>New York</name></topic> combine to mean that New York is the name of a city internally represented as "ny". It is written in the usual clear and practical style of articles on xml.com. Highly recommended as an introduction for anyone interested in XFML.

——— "XFML Core - eXchangeable Faceted Metadata Language." 2003. http://www.xfml.org/spec/1.0.html.

The specification for XFML, a markup language designed to handle faceted classifications. Browsing the site (http://www.xfml.org/) will reveal news about XFML and links to related software and web sites. XFML is not an officially recognized Internet standard, but is the de facto standard.

Vickery, B.C. Faceted Classification: A Guide to Construction and Use of Special Schemes. London: Aslib, 1960.

A perfect little book, with just 63 pages of text. From chapter A, Introduction, to U, Mechanization, it covers everything about making a faceted classification: what they are, why they are needed, how to do facet analysis, examples from existing faceted schemes, orderings, common subdivisions, the contents of each facet, notation, filing order, how to perform classification with the created system, and indexing. Each chapter is brief but has full coverage of the subject. "The technique of constructing a special faceted classification is not a settled, automatic, codified procedure. Nothing so complex as the field of knowledge could be analysed and organized by rule-of-thumb. We can therefore offer no more than a guide, describing tested procedures and discussing some difficulties." Vickery was a member of the Classification Research Group and one of the foremost classificationists.
Background

Broughton, Vanda, and Heather Lane. "Classification Schemes Revisited: Applications to Web Indexing and Searching." Journal of Internet Cataloguing 2 no. 3/4 (2000): 143-155.

A short discussion of using classification systems to organize the web, one of many such. The authors are both involved with BC2 and naturally think it is the best system for organizing information online. They list reasons why faceted classifications are best (e.g. no theoretical limits to specificity or exhaustivity; easier to handle complex subjects; flexible enough to accommodate different user needs) and take a brief look at how BC2 works. They conclude with a discussion of how and why it should be applied to online resources, and a plea for recognition of the importance of classification and subject analysis skills, even when full-text searching is available and databases respond instantly.

Chan, Lois Mai, Eric Childress, Rebecca Dean, Edward T. O'Neill, and Diane Vizine-Goetz. "A Faceted Approach to Subject Data in the Dublin Core Metadata Record." Journal of Internet Cataloging 4 no. 1/2 (2001): 35-47.

This article describes FAST, the Faceted Application of Subject Terminology, a project at OCLC to make Library of Congress Subject Headings easier to use in Dublin Core metadata by breaking out facets of space, time, and form. Work on FAST can be watched at its web site, http://www.oclc.org/research/projects/fast/, which has recent presentations and reports. It is interesting to see facets and Dublin Core combined, though both LCSH and FAST subject headings are beyond what most people making a small faceted classification would want or need.

Duncan, Elizabeth B. "Structuring Knowledge Bases for Designers of Learning Materials." Hypermedia 1 no. 1 (Spring 1989): 20-33.

——— "A Faceted Approach to Hypertext." In Hypertext: Theory Into Practice, ed. Ray McAleese (Oxford: Intellect, 1989): 157-163.

——— "A Concept-Map Thesaurus as a Knowledge-Based Hypertext Interface to a Bibliographic Database." In Informatics 10: Prospects for Intelligent Retrieval, ed. Kevin P. Jones (London: Aslib, 1990): 43-52.

Three pre-web articles about using hypertext for knowledge representation. Duncan discusses how to use graphical, hypertext displays (she used Xerox PARC's NoteCards on a Xerox 1186 workstation) along with concept maps and facet analysis, a combination that would now be done with topic maps. The screen shots of her graphical displays are quite interesting. Her interest in facets is in how to use them to show things to different people in different ways, for example, so that experts can enter knowledge into a system in one way while novices can see it in another. Duncan found that facet labels (e.g. Process and Product) prompted the expert to think of related concepts when inputting data, and made navigation easier for users. Facets can be joined together, e.g. "Agents (causing) Process," leading to a "reasoning system." She is especially interested in how to show relstionships between two things: e.g., A causes B, A uses B, A occurs in B. This is an important question in facet theory, but probably not worth worrying about in a small online classification where the relations are fixed and obvious.

These articles may be difficult to find, in which case the reader can find a nice sumary in the next article, by Ellis and Vasconcelos (2000). Anyone interested in tracing the history of facets and hypertext will, however, want to see the originals.

Ellis, David, and Ana Vasconcelos. "The Relevance of Facet Analysis for World Wide Web Subject Organization and Searching." Journal of Internet Cataloging 2 no. 3/4 (2000): 97-114.

This is a revised version of the earlier article by Ellis and Vasconcelos (1999) (see Not Relevant, below), though that is not indicated, and much of it is identical, word for word. There is a new section covering the work of Elizabeth Duncan, which is useful and informative, but the reader is better advised to go to the originals if available.

Foskett, D.J. "Ranganathan and 'User-Friendliness.'" Libri 42 no. 3 (1992): 227-234.

Ranganathan always showed a great concern for the user and all the ways he or she would use a library. His work is no less applicable in the computer age, and principles such as the Five Laws of Library Science are valid no matter how information is sought. Foskett discusses user friendliness and the usefulness of facet analysis in online systems, which he says it will work very well for information storage, retrieval, and searching. Time will undoubtedly prove him correct.

The Knowledge Management Connection. "Faceted Classification of Information." http://www.kmconnection.com/DOC100100.htm.

An explanation of faceted classification meant for people working in knowledge management. An example given for a high-technology company has the fundamental categories Products, Applications, Organizations, People, Domain objects ("technologies applied in the marketplace in which the organization participates"), Events (i.e. time), and Publications.

Steckel, Mike. "Ranganathan for IAs." Boxes and Arrows, 7 October 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/ranganathan_for_ias.php.

A short but useful introduction to S.R. Ranganathan, his laws of library science, and how they apply to the web, and the Colon Classification. There is nothing new here to anyone with a more than passing acquaintance with the man and his work, but that is a small subset of the world's population. For the rest, this is a good, short place to start. It would be useful for anyone wanting to explain to non-information studies people why they want to start work on a faceted classification.

Tzitzikas, Yannis, Anastasia Analyti, Nicolas Spyratos, and Panos Constantopolous. "An algebraic approach for specifying compound terms in faceted taxonomies," in Proceedings of the 13th European-Japanese Conference on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases, EJC’2003 (Kitakyushu, Japan: 2003). http://www.csi.forth.gr/~tzitzik/XFML+CAMEL/papers/CoTeCAlgebra_paper.pdf.

Tzitzikas, Yannis, Nicolas Spyratos, Panos Constantopolous, and Anastasia Analyti. "Extended Faceted Taxonomies for Web Catalogs." Paper presented at the Third International Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering, WISE 2002, Singapore, December, 2002. Gzipped PostScript version available at http://www.csi.forth.gr/~tzitzik/publications/Tzitzikas_WISE_2002.ps.gz.

These two papers are very mathematical and use lots of formulas, but that should not frighten anyone interested in current advanced work on facets and their use online. The articles cover much the same matter, but the second would be the best one to read first, since it has fewer formal proofs and more background on facets and web navigation. The writers have designed algorithms that will make it possible to easily define which facet combinations are impossible in a given classification system. Because of the way facets work, as compared to lengthy enumerative systems, a few restrictions can have wide-ranging effect on the entire scheme. This information can guide interfaces and prevent the user from ever being able to ask for something impossible. Their examples involve Greek resorts and sports. A person planning a trip to Greece might want to get a list of what sports are possible on Crete. Boating is an option, but skiing is not. However, skiing is possible on Mt. Olympus. The system described in these papers would make it possible for the software behind a tourism web site's interface to stop such impossible options from ever being shown to the user. (There are other ways to do these restrictions, such as manually entering every possible combination in every facet ordering, but they would be very laborious.) If these algorithms are turned into working code and made available in easy to use software packages for popular programmings languages, online faceted classification would benefit immensely.

Tzitzikas's online list of publications at http://www.csi.forth.gr/~tzitzik/publications.htm has many more related papers available.
Not Relevant

Devadason, Francis J., Neelawat Intaraksa, Ponprapa Patamawongjariya, Kavita Desai. "Faceted Indexing Based System for Organizing and Accessing Internet Resources." Knowledge Organization 29 no. 2 (2002): 65-77.

An interesting but somewhat confusing article telling how the writers described web pages with Dublin Core metadata, including a faceted classification, and built a system that lets users browse the collection through the facets. They seem to want to cover too much in a short article, and unnecessary space is given over to screen shots showing how Dublin Core metadata was entered. The screen shots of the resulting browsable system are, unfortunately, not as enlightening as one would hope, and there is no discussion of how the system was actually written or the technology behind it. Still, it could be worth reading as an example of such a system and how it is treated in journals.

Ellis, David, and Ana Vasconcelos. "Ranganathan and the Net: Using Facet Analysis to Search and Organise the World Wide Web." Aslib Proceedings 51 no. 1 (Jan 1999): 3-10.

This article gives a cheerfully brief and undetailed account of how to make a faceted classification system, then describes information retrieval and searching on the web. It concludes by saying that facets would be excellent in helping users search and browse the web, but offers no real clues as to how this can be done.

Gödert, Winfried. "Facet classification in online retrieval." International Classification 18 no. 2 (1991): 98-109.

"Online retrieval" conjures up a very different mental image now than in 1991, the year this article was written, and the year Tim Berners-Lee first revealed the new hypertext system he called the World Wide Web. Gödert shows that truncation and Boolean logic, combined with notation from a faceted classification system, will be a powerful way of searching for information. It undoubtedly is, but no system built now would require a user searching for material on "nervous systems of bone fish" to enter "Fdd$ and Leaa$". This is worth reading for someone interested in seeing how searching and facets can go together, but the web has made this article quite out of date.
Example Web Sites

CMS Review (http://www.cmsreview.com/Directory.html)

As discussed in Doyle (2003) above (see Recommended). CMS Review made their own faceted classification system for content management systems (software that makes it easy to manage web sites, especially large ones). The user can start to browse it and choose one facet (perhaps operating system), then another (perhaps price), then another, in any order, and the available systems fitting those restrictions will be listed. Content management systems are complicated, and there are many of them. This site makes it easy to find systems that match user needs and make comparisons between any two. It would be nice if it was easier to rearrange facet ordering, but that is not simple to do in a web page. The work here is of extra interest because content management system vendors may not be interested in making it easy to compare everything about their product with another vendor's. Users will benefit if it is easy for them to find out what others have already unearthed, and to share their own work.

Dive Into Accessibility

In his weblog entry "This is XFML" (http://diveintomark.org/archives/2002/12/03/this_is_xfml, 3 December 2002) Mark Pilgrim says, "XFML is a new format for providing hierarchical faceted metadata.... Frankly, I couldn't make heads or tails of it until a kind soul (Albert de Klein) mocked up an XFML representation of Dive Into Accessbility, my tutorial on web accessibility techniques. Then it all became clear." With XFML he could make a version of his site (http://www.diveintoaccessibility.org/) that looked like a portal (http://facetmap.com/demo/browse.jsp?map=diveintoaccessibility&v=1&s=000000000000) or that was searchable and browsable by facet (http://facetmap.com/demo/browse.jsp?map=diveintoaccessibility&v=2&s=000000000000). Dive Into Accessibility is the sort of web site that is easy to organize into facets and benefits greatly from doing so. Compare the original version of the site with the facet-based interfaces created with XFML to see the improvements.

Epicurious (http://www.epicurious.com/)

Epicurious has thousands of recipes and has organized them into a faceted classification, by Main Ingredient, Cuisine (ethnic origin), Special Considerations (e.g. low fat), Preparation Method, Season/Occasion, and Course/Dish. The user can start browsing the collection through the main headings in each facet (http://eat.epicurious.com/recipes/browse_home/index.ssf?/recipes/browse_home/index.html) and narrow the focus as desired, or use the advanced search (http://eat.epicurious.com/recipes/enhanced_search/index.ssf/?/recipes/enhanced_search/index.html) which lets the user build up, in a straighforward way, a complicated search by picking and choosing which headings in which facets should be included.

FacetMap's wine demonstration (http://facetmap.com/browse.jsp) and Wine.com (http://www.wine.com/)

FacetMap has a simple facet demonstration on their site . One can browse a wine classification by varietal (red, white, bubbly, etc.), region, and price. Clicking on "bubbly" narrows down the options, limiting the remaining choices in all three facets. Choosing "sparkling" from the varietal facet narrows it still more, and choosing bottles priced under $20 lists six bottles that could still be divided by region. The user can find an appropriate bottle of wine in many different ways depending on how he or she thinks about wine and what his or her needs are (a cheap bottle, something white to go with fish, something local to support nearby vintners).

Wine.com's system is similar. From the home page, the user may choose to browse by type of wine (for example, white), then by varietal (Semillon) and see a listing that can be sorted by price, rating, winery, or type (which is redundant, because the type has already been defined—this option should not be visible in this case). The advanced search option off the home page lets the user form a query by defining price range, type of wine, and region.

There are other ways that wine could be classified, of course, but these are very accessible examples and good ones for showing the nature of facets. Those unfamiliar with facets (but familiar with wine!) could think about how they would classify wine themselves, based on how they choose and drink wine, and make their own faceted scheme in an easy and fun thought experiment.

lawforwa.org (http://lawforwa.org/)

As discussed in Louie, Maddox, and Washington (2003) above (see Recommended). "Your gateway to Washington state law and government." Choose the Advanced Search option to see the faceted classification they used and how it guides the search tool. It is a very interesting interface and when the site has been finished and tested with users, their experiences will be worth reading. It has one problem that is addressed in part by the work of Yannis Tzitzikas et al (see above, in Background): it is possible for the user to construct a query that is already known by the system to have no answers or to be impossible. Their advanced search screen would be better (though this is not simple to program) if, as the user selected a subject in a facet, the options displayed under other facets changed to reflect the known (or possible) combinations. The user would be saved the frustration of carefully choosing from three listings, one of them very long, only to find there is nothing available. A faceted navigation system like this could be made to tailor itself to the user while the user is actually constructing a search—surely a fine example of how to save the time of the reader (one of Ranganathan's Five Laws of Library Science).
Mailing Lists

The Faceted Classification Discussion (FCD) Mailing List. http://poorbuthappy.com/fcd/.

178 people are on the list, as of 14 October 2003, including some writers mentioned above. The list was founded in December 2002, and the archives are open to all. Worth joining for anyone working with, or just interested in, faceted classifications.

xfml (a mailing list about XFML). http://groups.yahoo.com/group/xfml/.

A slightly older list, created in May 2002, but with fewer members (79 as of 14 October 2003). It concentrates on XFML, and so is more focused and technical. It is the only place to go to ask questions about XFML.
Alphabetical List of Resources

This is an alphabetical list of everything above, without annotations.

    * Broughton, Vanda. "Faceted Classification as a Basis for Knowledge Organization in a Digital Environment; the Bliss Bibliographic Classification as a Model for Vocabulary Management and the Creation of Multi-Dimensional Knowledge Structures." The New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 7 (2001): 67-102.
    * Broughton, Vanda, and Heather Lane. "Classification Schemes Revisited: Applications to Web Indexing and Searching." Journal of Internet Cataloguing 2 no. 3/4 (2000): 143-155.
    * Chan, Lois Mai, Eric Childress, Rebecca Dean, Edward T. O'Neill, and Diane Vizine-Goetz. "A Faceted Approach to Subject Data in the Dublin Core Metadata Record." Journal of Internet Cataloging 4 no. 1/2 (2001): 35-47.
    * CMS Review. http://www.cmsreview.com/Directory.html.
    * Devadason, Francis J., Neelawat Intaraksa, Ponprapa Patamawongjariya, Kavita Desai. "Faceted Indexing Based System for Organizing and Accessing Internet Resources." Knowledge Organization 29 no. 2 (2002): 65-77.
    * Dive Into Accessibility. http://www.diveintoaccessibility.org/.
    * Doyle, Bob. "The Classification & Evaluation of Content Management Systems." The Gilbane Report 11 no. 2 (March 2003): 2-13. http://www.gilbane.com/artpdf/GR11.2.pdf.
    * Duncan, Elizabeth B. "Structuring Knowledge Bases for Designers of Learning Materials." Hypermedia 1 no. 1 (Spring 1989): 20-33.
    * ——— "A Faceted Approach to Hypertext." In Hypertext: Theory Into Practice, ed. Ray McAleese (Oxford: Intellect, 1989): 157-163.
    * ——— "A Concept-Map Thesaurus as a Knowledge-Based Hypertext Interface to a Bibliographic Database." In Informatics 10: Prospects for Intelligent Retrieval, ed. Kevin P. Jones (London: Aslib, 1990): 43-52.
    * Ellis, David, and Ana Vasconcelos. "Ranganathan and the Net: Using Facet Analysis to Search and Organise the World Wide Web." Aslib Proceedings 51 no. 1 (Jan 1999): 3-10.
    * ——— "The Relevance of Facet Analysis for World Wide Web Subject Organization and Searching." Journal of Internet Cataloging 2 no. 3/4 (2000): 97-114.
    * Epicurious. http://www.epicurious.com/.
    * The Faceted Classification Discussion (FCD) Mailing List. http://poorbuthappy.com/fcd/.
    * FacetMap's wine demonstration. http://facetmap.com/browse.jsp.
    * Fast, Karl, Fred Leise, Mike Steckel. "0. All About Facets and Controlled Vocabularies" Boxes and Arrows, 9 December 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/all_about_facets_controlled_vocabularies.php.
    * ——— "1. What Is a Controlled Vocabulary?" Boxes and Arrows, 16 December 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/what_is_a_controlled_vocabulary.php.
    * ——— "2. Creating a Controlled Vocabulary" Boxes and Arrows, 7 April 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/creating_a_controlled_vocabulary.php.
    * ——— "3. Synonym Rings and Authority Files" Boxes and Arrows, 26 August 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/synonym_rings_and_authority_files.php
    * ——— "4. Controlled Vocabularies: A Glosso-Thesaurus" Boxes and Arrows, 27 October 2003. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/controlled_vocabularies_a_glossothesaurus.php.
    * ——— "Facets and Controlled Vocabularies: An Annotated Bibliography" Boxes and Arrows, n.d. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/Facets_CV/Bibliography.htm
    * Foskett, D.J. "Ranganathan and 'User-Friendliness.'" Libri 42 no. 3 (1992): 227-234.
    * Gödert, Winfried. "Facet classification in online retrieval." International Classification 18 no. 2 (1991): 98-109.
    * The Knowledge Management Connection. "Faceted Classification of Information." http://www.kmconnection.com/DOC100100.htm.
    * Kwasnick, Barbara H. "The Role of Classification in Knowledge Representation and Discovery." Library Trends 48 no. 1 (Summer 1999): 22-47.
    * lawforwa.org. http://lawforwa.org/.
    * Louie, Aaron J., Eric L. Maddox, and William Washington. "Using Faceted Classification to Provide Structure for Information Architecture." Paper presented at the ASIS&T 2003 Information Architecture Summit, Portland, OR, 21-23 March 2003. http://depts.washington.edu/pettt/presentations/conf_2003/IASummit.pdf.
    * Priss, Uta, and Elin Jacob. "Utilizing Faceted Structures for Information Systems Design," in ASIS '99: Proceedings of the 62nd ASIS Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C., October 31 - November 4, 1999: Knowledge: Creation, Organization, and Use, edited by Larry Woods, 203-212. (Medford, NJ: ASIS, [1999?]). http://www.upriss.org.uk/papers/asis99.pdf.
    * Ranganathan, S.R. Elements of Library Classification. 3rd ed. New York: Asia Publishing House, 1962.
    * Spiteri, Louise. "A Simplified Model for Facet Analysis: Ranganathan 101." Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science 23 no. 1/2 (April-July 1998): 1-30. http://aifia.org/pg/a_simplified_model_for_facet_analysis.php.
    * Steckel, Mike. "Ranganathan for IAs." Boxes and Arrows, 7 October 2002. http://www.boxesandarrows.com/archives/ranganathan_for_ias.php.
    * Tzitzikas, Yannis, Anastasia Analyti, Nicolas Spyratos, and Panos Constantopolous. "An algebraic approach for specifying compound terms in faceted taxonomies," in Proceedings of the 13th European-Japanese Conference on Information Modelling and Knowledge Bases, EJC’2003 (Kitakyushu, Japan: 2003). http://www.csi.forth.gr/~tzitzik/XFML+CAMEL/papers/CoTeCAlgebra_paper.pdf.
    * Tzitzikas, Yannis, Nicolas Spyratos, Panos Constantopolous, and Anastasia Analyti. "Extended Faceted Taxonomies for Web Catalogs." Paper presented at the Third International Conference on Web Information Systems Engineering, WISE 2002, Singapore, December, 2002. Gzipped PostScript version available at http://www.csi.forth.gr/~tzitzik/publications/Tzitzikas_WISE_2002.ps.gz.
    * Van Dijck, Peter. "Introduction to XFML." xml.com, 22 January 2003. http://www.xml.com/lpt/a/2003/01/22/xfml.html.
    * ——— "XFML Core - eXchangeable Faceted Metadata Language." 2003. http://www.xfml.org/spec/1.0.html
    * Vickery, B.C. Faceted Classification: A Guide to Construction and Use of Special Schemes. London: Aslib, 1960.
    * Wine.com. http://www.wine.com/.
    * xfml (a mailing list about XFML). http://groups.yahoo.com/group/xfml/.



;;; ==============================
;;; EOF
